So, let's talk about our
old friend recursion.
I imagine many of you,
whether you've gotten to a CS program or
not have had to deal with recursion.
Just by virtue like, it shows up
somewhat frequently when coding.
When I say somewhat frequently, I mean
it rarely shows up but it does show.
Let's go with that.
So the idea with recursion is,
what happens if you have a problem that's
just really too big to solve, right?
You're asked to sorta an array
with a million numbers in it.
Well, what you can do is,
you can break that problem
down into two problems, right?
So you can solve one for
500,000 and one for 500,000.
Then you can continue splitting
that down until eventually,
you will end at a problem that
you do know how to solve.
And then you can re-stitch
the solutions back together again.
That's kinda the idea
of recursion is like,
break a big problem into
two smaller problems,
until eventually you have a small enough
problem that you know how to solve.
The entire gist of it.
So, in English, if you recursively
define something in English.
Like here's my example here,
what is a seafarer?
It's one who fares the sea.
Which is the most pointless definition
of the word seafarer ever, right?
But notice that I'm using the word seafare
in the definition of seafarer, right?
It's something that's
defined in terms of itself.
Which in English doesn't
really serve you too much, but
in computer science it actually
ends up being fairly useful.
So, let's look at like the dumbest
most pointless version of
a recursive function encoding.
I have this function here
that all does is it logs out.
This actually should be current,
doesn't matter.
In any case
Notice that count To calls count To in and
of itself, right?
So, this function count To,
is defined in terms of itself.
So let's actually,
I can even just copy and paste this,
I'm gonna bring up my console here.
And I'm gonna say function and I'm
actually gonna modify this to say current,
cuz that's actually what I meant.
And I say count To (10).
What do you expect this to do?
I wanna think I have to give it a 0 or
1, something like that.
What do you expect us to do?
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> Yep, it's going to go count 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, right?
There's no for loop in here though,
how did that work?
Well calls count To, and then eventually,
it calls count To again.
And it goes through this over and
over again until
I realize that this case right here if,
and then it stops calling count To.
So again, this is not a useful
recursive function, but
this is a recursive function in that,
it's a function that calls itself.
Now, I imagine most of you can imagine
a better way of writing this, right.
A simple for loop, a forereach,
a map, any one of those things would
have been clearer than this,
abomination of code right here.
But I wanted to demonstrate
to you just basically that,
you can make basically anything
recursive if you really try hard enough.
And, if you've ever written code or in
languages like racket, or scheme, or Lisp.
Or basically any Lisp,
sort of oriented language,
this is actually the only
way of doing a for loop.
Which is with recursion.
Definitely not a scheme class.
Though, I'll just toss
out a recommendation.
Not that I'm gonna teach you
how to write scheme, but
it made me a better programmer to go and
learn a little bit of how to write scheme.
So, and it's a fun weekend project.
It's because it's a pretty simple language
>> Isn't map.
You had a map function usually
recursive by definition.
>> The map function is
I don't think so, am I missing something?
>> I mean I've been dabbling with
functional languages a lot recently,
so I might be stuck in that space but
>> I mean it's more iterative, right?
Cuz with a map function,
you provided mapping which is then
call on every single item the array.
and function isn't calling itself, right?
So that map is undefined
in terms of itself.
Which is what a recursive function is.
>> I think since in functional languages,
you don't have iteration.
I mean, maybe that's the only way to make
a map function in a functional language.
>> Yeah, I guess if you're gonna
implement map in something like Lua.
Or not Lua, but Lisp,
inherently because those languages
model loops as recursion,
then I guess it would have to be.
So the question is,
there's a couple of questions there.
That's unpack it just a little bit.
The first thing is,
if I put in max as infinity.
Yeah cuz it's never gonna stop counting,
right.
So, with normal recursion,
this says this actually would just get
tail called optimize it probably would,
okay?
So you'd actually get an infinite loop and
not a stack overflow, right?
Because if it's tail call optimized,
you'd be modeled as a loop and
not a recursive function.
So you'd actually end
up in an infinite loop,
which is maybe mildly better
than a stack overflow.
But, let's actually define
both of those things.
Infinite iteration, is when you
have a loop that never ends, right?
So, if I do a while loop like while true,
right, that's an infinite loop.
Something like this, while true,
something like that,
this would be an infinite loop
cuz this would never end.
Whereas if I count to here
a max of positive infinity.
That would also never finish, right?
And that would be a stack overflow.
Because eventually JavaScript engine
just kinda gives up, like hey,
you've taken all of my stack memory.
I'm just gonna go puke
in the corner basically.
Now, let's talk about tail call
optimization for just a second.
One, it's still kind of a murky
proposition in JavaScript,
that it is part of ES 5 or ES 2015.
But I don't think every engine
implements tail call optimization yet.
So in other words,
don't rely on tail call optimization.
And what tail call optimization is,
if you make the last line of
your recursive function,
a return of your recursive call.
Then technically a programming language
can automatically turn that into a loop.
Which is inherently faster and more
memory efficient than a recursive call.
So, I don't know if this does
because it lacks return.
That, if it would happen,
I think it would.
But it also depends on the engine, right?
I don't know if spider monkey does it,
I don't know if he does it.
Because there was always controversy
of how to implement that.
Anyway, that whole last part
about tail call optimization,
not something you really need to care
about for the sake of this course.
But it's something interesting, you can go
read up on yourself on how to do it and
what it is.
>> What is the purpose of the list
parameter, looks unused in this case?
>> It is, yeah.
I was gonna have to populate
that array there with
the counted numbers and
I did not take it out.
So yeah, the list thing here is,
pointless for the moment.
When is recursion useful?
Well, when you find yourself in
the definition of your problem.
Modeling it in terms of smaller
versions of the same problem,
that's a good indication that your
problem could be solved recursively.
So one of the classic examples that
people like to talk about with recursion,
is something called
the Fibonacci sequence.
Now, again,
I don't wanna veer too mathy here.
But the idea of
the Fibonacci sequences is,
the Fibonacci(3) is the Fibonacci(2)
+ the Fibonacci(1).
All right.
And the definition of the Fibonacci
(100) is, Fibonacci + 99 +
the Fibonacci(98) +
the Fibonacci(97)+ the Fibonacci(98).
So on and so forth.
That you can generalize
as the Fibonacci(n),
is the Fibonacci(n-1) + Fibonacci(n-2),
right.
And what is the Fibonacci(n-1)?
Well, that's the Fibonacci(n-2)
+ Fibonacci(n-3), right?
And you can kind of expand that out,
to eventually you
arrive at what the Fibonacci(2)
is defined to be 1 and
the Fibonacci(1) is defined to be 1 and
the Fibonacci(0) is defined to be 0.
Those are like kind of like the givens.
So, as you might imagine the
Fibonacci(3)= Fibonacci(2)+ Fibonacci(1).
So the Fibonacci(3) = 2.
The Fibonacci(4) would
be the Fibonacci(3),
which we just found out
as 2+ Fibonacci(2)=1.
What I just say, 3, 4.
Anyway, it's kinda hard to keep all
this in your head, right [LAUGH].
So, there are negative Fibonacci numbers,
we're ignoring them.
Please for the sake of this course,
we're just talking about
positive Fibonacci numbers.
So, the first thing is, when you're
talking about recursion is, always,
always, always just define
your base case first.
The base case is when your
your recursion stops, right?
Cuz if you don't ever stop your recursion,
then you get stack overflows.
So, for example up here in our count To,
this if statement right here,
is your base case.
So, if current is greater than max,
then return, right.
That's when we've decided like, okay,
we've satisfied all the conditions,
we're now done,
we're not recursing anymore.
So, this is our base case that if n=2,
look at this one,
equal to 2 or equal to 1,
then return 1, otherwise return 0.
So we have the n=2 or the n=1.
Don't click on it.
So the base case here is that we return
1 and if we somehow end up on 0,
we shouldn't end up on 0.
But if we did, then you return 0.
Okay?
And then we just define the Fibonacci
in terms of what our definition was.
So the Fibonacci(5) is
the return the Fibonacci(5-1),
which is 4, and (5-2), which is 3, right.
Which then calls this, until eventually
those arrive to their base cases.
And then, those return until eventually
we kind of add all those numbers up and
we end up with the correct answer.
>> So, Fibonacci(2), right.
That makes sense.
So on and so forth.
So you can see here, 2+3= 5, 3+ 5= 8,
5+ 8= 13, 8+13=21.
Okay?
Let's break this down into what
the calls actually break down into,
you'll often see recursion
modeled as like a tree.
Because essentially that's what it's
kind of breaking itself down into.
So, here if I call Fibonacci(5).
This is gonna call this and it's gonna
call Fibonacci(4), which is this call.
And Fibonacci(3),
which is gonna be this call.
And that's gonna break down into
these various different calls.
Fibonacci(4) is gonna call 3 and it's
gonna call Fibonacci(2) which is 1, right?
And then Fibonacci(3) will break
down into 2 and 1, these are both 1.
So this is gonna be 1+1, which is
gonna return 2+1, which is gonna be 3.
So, Fibonacci(4)=3 and then Fibonacci(3)
over here, is gonna be 1+1, which is 2.
And then these two are gonna add together,
which is 3+2, which is gonna be 5.
Now, at the end of the day,
what did I end up doing?
I ended up adding 1 to itself a whole lot,
right?
This is a whole lot of adding 1 together.
So, if I end up doing something like,
Fibonacci(15),
which is a fairly large number.
610, how many times did I add 1 to itself?
610 times, right.
16, right 987.
If start getting into really big numbers
of Fibonacci, it gets kinda ugly.
Notice how long that took,
it's not instant.
I did 35 there and it took a good worth.
2 seconds of my very good
MacBook to compute that, right.
So, as you can see here,
this is actually super inefficient.
But the code here is really quite nice,
right?
In the sense of like, it's kinda elegant
in the sense of like, it's fairly easy to
read that the Fibonacci(5) is gonna
be the Fibonacci(4) + Fibonacci(3).
So, you'll find this is frequently
the case with recursive calls is.
It might not be the most
efficient way of doing things, but
you can often end up with
fairly elegant looking code.
Now, what's the shame about this?
We have Fibonacci(3),
how many times do we call Fibonacci(3),
instead of the Fibonacci(5)?
At least twice, right?
Well, exactly twice.
But imagine when we call Fibonacci (15),
how many times do you think
we call Fibonacci (3)?
A lot.
Does the Fibonacci(3) change over time?
No, the Fibonacci(3) is
always defined to be 2.
So, this would actually be pretty
effective if we did something called
memorialization.
Where we could actually say, hey, once
you've completed the Fibonacci(4) to be,
whatever it is 3,
don't compute that anymore, right?
It's always gonna be that, so
if you ever see that again, just return
the same answer that I got last time.
So, not necessary the point
of this course but
I just wanted to call out that this would
be a perfect case for a memorization.
You can rewrite Fibonacci as in a for
loop instead of as a recursion, right.
And you end up with code
that looks like this,
which is just numbers adding
itself together, right?
It's a little less clear,
I might argue that this code
might be easier to read, right?
But this is, 500 times faster and
probably even more than 500 times.
So if I call here, let's see,
Fibonacci(16) or Fibonacci(35).
Notice how much faster this is going,
let's do 100.
Notice that this is just kicking
out huge numbers really quickly.
If you did Fibonacci(100),
with the previous way that we had defined
the Fibonacci sequence,
it probably would have crashed my browser.
So, it's another one of those things where
in this case, the iterative approach is so
much better.
It's probably almost always
going to be the correct answer.
And this isn't terrible code.
I might read some comments in there,
but in general this is gonna be better.
But, yeah this is to say that, frequently
recursive problems can be rewritten
as iterative solutions but not always.